# Equisobrain
## Abstract
To cope with seasonal modifications of the environmental resources, brain anticipates and changes both its structural organisation and functioning. However, the tempo and mode of these central changes have been poorly investigated in mammalians. Here we describe a longitudinal morphometric neuroimaging study in a well know animal model to study seasonality: sheep. Using new magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) resources comprising a high-resolution brain template, its associated tissue priors (500-µm isotropic resolution) and a corresponding sheep brain atlas (202 regions of interest) we investigate the impact of seasonal transitions between winter and summer season on brain microstructure using voxel-based morphometry. We observed significant modifications of grey matter concentration (GMC) in pivotal brain areas involved in circadian rhythms (pineal, hypothalamus) and light processing (suprageniculate nucleus) but also within regions related to sensory processing, learning, memory, behavior control, and social cognition. These findings provide new insights into mammalian brain functioning revealing its flexibility and its adaptability to cope to environmental changes.



## Material and methods

  ### Voxel-Based Morphometry Analysis
For voxel-based morphometry analysis (VBM), we used T1w images. Data were first denoised and signal bias corrected using Ginkgo and N4BiasFieldCorrection respectively and linearly coregistered to the TEBTA template using antsRegistrationSyNQuick. Coregistrated data were then pre-processed with SPM. Each image was segmented into probability maps of GM, WM, and CSF using the default settings in the SPM8 toolbox and the TEBTA version of GM, WM, and CSF probability maps. The transformation matrices obtained were used to normalize GM, WM and CSF probability maps obtained for each subject. GM and WM probability maps of each scanning session were normalized to our stereotaxic space using transformations matrices obtained herein and resampled. Normalized GM and WM images were used for diffeomorphic anatomical registration using exponentiated lie algebra (DARTEL) to calculate diffeormorphic flowfields. Each normalized GM image was then warped using deformation parameters calculated by the DARTEL routine and then modulated to correct the volume changes that may have occurred during the deformation step. Finally, normalized-warped-modulated GM images were spatially smoothed by convolving with a 4 mm full width at half-maximum (FWHM) isotropic Gaussian kernel to create GMC maps. To assess regional GM changes over the groups (unweaned n = 12 versus weaned n = 11), GMC maps were compared using an unpaired Student t test proposed by SPM. A brain mask was used to constrain the analysis to the brain. For each cluster, the significance of the peak voxel was set as p < 0.05 (t-score = 1.72, degree of freedom=21). The results are presented on an axial and sagittal brain slice series generated with nilearn.
  ### Diffusion imaging data analysis
Because of its practical implementation, the NODDI model has become very popular to map the tissue microstructure in vivo and ex vivo in both clinical42–45 and preclinical applications46,47. The NODDI model relies on a biophysical model that separates the diffusion of water into three diffusive compartments (intra-neurite, extraneurite and CSF)31,46, which are non-exchanging, contributing to the global diffusion attenuation. The net diffusion signal attenuation (A) corresponds to the following linear combination A resulting from a linear combination of the individual signal attenuations associated with each compartment, including: 1- the neurite compartment of water molecules trapped within axons and dendrites characterized by a volume fraction (fic), 2- the extra-neurite compartment characterized by a volume fraction (fec) and 3- the CSF compartment containing free molecules with an isotropic displacement probability characterized by a volume fraction (fiso). Hence, the net signal diffusion signal A corresponds to the following linear combination:
A = fic · a.ic + fec · a.ec + fiso · a.iso
We pre-processed raw multishell diffusion imaging data and mapped estimated each of the previously described fractions using Ginkgo. First multishell diffusion imaging data were corrected for magnetic susceptibility distribution (topup), motions and eddy current-induced distortions (eddy). Then mean of B0 data for each animal was calculated and resulting images were used to calculate a diffusion weighted template using by modelbuild. Resulting template was then normalized to the TEBTA T1w space using antsRegistrationSyNQuick. Then Ginkgo was used for NODDI analysis (DwiMicrostructureField) and released 4 maps: the fractional anisotropy, the intraneuritic fraction, the orientation dispersion index, and the isotropic fraction. Both linear and nonlinear transformation calculated by modelbuild and antsRegistrationSyNQuick were applied once to each contrast for spatial normalisation of the data within the TEBTA space using antsApplyTransforms. Then, images were spatially smoothed with an isotropic Gaussian kernel by convolving a 4-mm full-width at half maximum. To assess regional FA, ICF, ODI and isoF changes over the groups each contrast was compared using an unpaired Student t test proposed by SPM. A brain mask was used to constrain the analysis to brain. For each cluster, the significance of the peak voxel was set as p < 0.05 (t-score = 1.72, degree of freedom=21). The results are presented on an axial and sagittal brain slice series generated with nilearn.
  ### Functional imaging data analysis
rs‐fMRI data were pre‐processed as previously described17,25,27,48. Briefly, EPI images were corrected for slice timing (slicetimer), motions (antsMotionCorr) and susceptibility distribution (topup). Then mean of EPI data for each animal was calculated and resulting images were used to calculate a diffusion weighted template using by modelbuild. Resulting template was then normalized to the TEBTA T1w space using antsRegistrationSyNQuick. Then images were detrended, low- and high-pass filtered (0.01Hz – 0.08Hz) the effect of the six previously calculated motion parameters including translations and rotations, both WM and CSF and global signals, were removed from the data through linear regression using nilearn
Fractional amplitude of low‐frequency fluctuations analysis
The fractional amplitude of low‐frequency fluctuation (0.01–0.08 Hz) values were computed using the previously processed 4D data the fALFF function from 1000 Functional Connectomes Project was used to reveal the temporal and regional changes in GM occurring in fALFF maps. Then fALFF maps were spatially normalized to the TEBTA template using both linear and nonlinear transformation calculated previously and applied once using antsApplyTransforms. To assess regional fALFF changes over the groups each contrast was compared using an unpaired Student t test proposed by SPM. A brain mask was used to constrain the analysis to brain. For each cluster, the significance of the peak voxel was set as p < 0.05 (t-score = 1.72, degree of freedom=21). The results are presented on an axial and sagittal brain slice series generated with nilearn.
